cd ~/Downloads
unzip cd h2o-2.9.0.1556.zip
cd cd h2o-2.9.0.1556
java -Xmx1g -jar h2o.jar

// with this running in terminal, navigate to http://localhost:54321/ in your favorite browser //

1. Upload data
In the top row toolbar, navigate to Data / Upload.
Select whiskey_data.csv provided in this repository.
Click Upload.
On following page, click Submit.
When Inspect page loads, check that the dataset has 13 columns and 86 rows.


2. PCA (on original data)
In the top row toolbar, navigate to Model / Principal Component Analysis.
Under "source", start typing "whiskey" - or whatever your whiskey data file was named.
"Ignored columns" will reload with a list of the 13 columns available in the dataset.
Select "Distillery" as an ignored column.
Submit.
When PCA Model View comes up, click on "Scree & Variance Plots" to toggle Scree and Cumulative Variance Plots.
Also look at "Cum Prop Var" row of table below to check that at PC7, cumulative variance first passes over 0.85

To transform data, according to found PCA properties, click on "Score on dataset" (above Scree Plot).
Under "Source", again, start typing "whiskey" or whatever your whiskey data file was named.
Leave "Model" name as is.
Change "num pc" to 7 (as we are choosing to only take the first 7 components).
Click Submit.
When results come up, click on "Download as CSV" in long text list of options at the top of the page.
Once PCA-transformed set has been downloaded, open the file as a spreadsheet, and open your original whiskey dataset, 
and copy the "Distillery" column to the PCA spreadsheet, effectively appending the label to the end of each row.
Save resulting spreadsheet (7 PCA columns - PC0 through PC6, and Distillery column) as another csv (i.e. PCA_whiskey.csv)


3. k-means clustering (on PCA-ed data)
Return to h2o-GUI (at http://localhost:54321/ ) and repeat upload process (step 1) to upload PCA_whiskey.csv
When Inspect page loads, dataset should have 8 columns and 86 rows.

In top row toolbar, navigate to Model / K-Means Clustering.
Under "Source", start typing "PCA_whiskey" or whatever your second dataset is called.
In "Ignored columns", select "Distillery".
Under "k", instead of "2", input "2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15". 
This will run all 14 models in Grid Search mode, rather than you having to do each one by hand.
Click Submit.

Grid Search Progress page will load, and result in a table where each row has a blue link to a KMeans model (in column titled "model key")
Copy this entire table into a spreadsheet, including headers. PLEASE DO NOT CLOSE PAGE (for your own sanity).
Sort by "k" column, then graph "prediction error", using "k" as labels for the horizontal axis.
Choose k at which prediction error stops dropping as much.

Return back to h2o-GUI (at http://localhost:54321/ ) GridSearchProgress page (that you had open last)
Select the model key link for your chosen k (we chose 11).
On KMeans2ModelView page which opens up, scroll to the bottom, and click on "View the row-by-row cluster assignments" link at the bottom of the page.
When results come up, click on "Download as CSV" in long text list of options at the top of the page.
Once KMeans-labeled set has been downloaded, open the file as a spreadsheet, and open your original whiskey dataset.
Copy the Distillery column to the KMeans spreadsheet, effectively appending the label to each row.
Save resulting spreadsheet as another csv (KMeans_PCA_whiskey.csv)

Your resulting dataset should be simply 2 columns: Cluster ID, and Distillery.
Finally, filter by Cluster ID to see whiskeys that are similar to one another.
And there you have your 11 whiskey clusters, based on K-means clustering and Principal Component Analysis.
